---
layout: post
author: maria
summary: Lessons Learned
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/logo.png
published: false
---

When we set out to start a design cooperative, we knew we were doing something new for our industry, but it didn’t occur to us how new. The small number of design cooperatives scattered across the country exist on the boundaries of known structures for incorporation and taxation. hile we had a clear vision of the work we wanted to do, it was less clear how to get that work, track it, and pay ourselves for it. About a year ago, with just two clients, we set an ambitious goal for ourselves to pay ourselves not only for project work but also for overhead. Last month, we received our first distributions (read: money) for the work Just Designdid last year. Here are some of the lessons we’ve learned along the way.

##### Cooperatives don’t have to be cooperatives.
If you’re wanting to start a cooperative to sell bulk food or electricity, even a bicycle fix-up-and-retail cooperative, the tax code and incorporation law for cooperatives will fit you like a glove. But if you want to start a cooperative to provide services or perform some other enterprise, you’ll quickly find yourself running into dead ends. The state of Illinois, and most states in the nation, do not recognize professional design service firms as able to operate cooperatively. The language in the laws around cooperatives in the US is rather narrow. We were lucky enough to work with [Sarah Kaplan](http://www.sarahkaplanlaw.com/), who specializes in supporting cooperatives and other grassroots projects with legal advice and representation. She explained to us that our operating agreement holds us to every tenet of a cooperative, while our incorporation documents (as a PLLC) meet state expectations. We see this as a way to model a broader future for cooperatives.

##### Equal Pay for Equal Work.
It is standard practice to value more experienced work over less experienced work. This discretion in pay leads to a gap between entry-level and administrative employees (to say nothing of maintenance staff) and senior executives and leadership. Unconscious bias allows racism and sexism to influence discretion in pay, so that higher wages and leadership positions are more likely to be awarded to people with greater perceived power or privilege. We are also aware that, in order to cover overhead costs, firms charge our clients much more they pay employees.

While we also have overhead costs and payroll concerns, as a worker-owned cooperative, our priority is to our members. As a social justice design cooperative that had anti-racism and anti-oppression as one of our core tenets, how could we ensure that our financial decisions were just? We came to consensus that our dues to join Just Design would be weighted based on the US Census data on disparities in income based on gender, race, and education.

Each member receives an equal vote and equity in Just Design, regardless of the range of dues paid. After joining, every member is paid the same hourly rate - $42/hour, also agreed to by consensus, and adjusted annually for inflation and cost of living increases - to eliminate discretion in valuing certain work or expertise above others. Whether the work is administrative, for marketing, or for design, our members make the same amount. We do vary what we charge our clients. Grassroots organizations we wish to support are charged exactly what we pay ourselves, and we cover the overhead for such projects, as well as writing blogs like this one, by taking on work at either $63/hour or “market rate” $105/hour.

Though we have frequently revisited this decision as we realize how much overhead time is necessary to get a business up and running, or to try to determine which projects fall into which fee category, overall wage transparency and equality has helped us hold to our values, reminding us over and over again that soft skills, research, and behind-the-scenes work is just as important as our technical skills. Without working at it, our project mix balanced out progressively for the fiscal year 2018, with Just Designpaid work nearly covering our administrative or overhead work and research. In the coming year, our members committed to the ongoing cultivation of a business development strategy that will sustain this balance.

##### Communication.
One of the biggest overhead costs for Just Design is weekly meetings. In 2018 we agreed to set aside one to two hours every week for committee meetings. Our committees (finance, projects, legal, marketing, membership, general foundation, and full membership meetings) would meet for an hour each, and once a month we would all gather together via video chat to talk about tasks/progress/ideas as an overall group. Just Design members live in Chicago, New York, Tucson, and Minnesota, and we travel frequently for business, as all of our members work for other initiatives in addition to Just Design. We also are engaged in ongoing movement-building work, supporting activists and protesting. Because of all of these commitments, it was rare that each member would make each call, and that turned out to be a boon. If we had, we would never have been able to pay ourselves for all that overhead time.

So for the first quarter of 2019, we experimented with having no scheduled meetings aside from our quarterly virtual retreats. Unfortunately, it seems that without setting aside time every month, our schedules rarely align. In April, at our next virtual retreat, we will reassess our communication and meeting schedule.

##### Project Selection.
There is an inherent tension between our values and our bottom line, and we know it. The more we seek out the most just clients, at the lowest rates, the less we will be able to pay ourselves, and the less we are financially sustainable. The Just Design team spent much of the last year developing a project selection matrix that helps us review potential clients and projects with regard to our values. Admittedly, it does not allow us to be as nimble as we envisioned timeline-wise, since it requires three separate reviewers and a host of short-answer questions. After six months of use, we are ready to re-tune it with regard to tracking impact outcomes from project inception.

We’ve also learned that while many projects come to us, they don’t engage all of our member’s skills equally. Most of the projects that come to us relate to things we (or our team members) are known for: data collection and analysis, international development technologies, solar energy production and microgrids. If we want to grow into planning, design, and research, we need to get the word out ourselves. Perhaps our biggest learning in the last year is that everyone has the skills necessary to do business development, but many of us simply don’t feel effective at it. We love building relationships with community, and we are effective at supporting grassroots change, but worry that we may be misusing our valuable time if it does not seem to be leading us towards a recognizable project that fits into Just Design or our own personal passion projects.

This year we are challenging ourselves to set (and keep) business development goals to get the word out that we are looking for new clients, more work, and repeat customers in 2019. Would you like to work with us? Drop us a line.
