---
published: false
---
## Community Involvement Training: Connecting with the EPA

In July JustDesign members Maria, an architect, and Frank, an electrical engineer, travelled to Kansas City for the EPA's Community Involvement Training. JustDesign applied to present at this conference a year and a half prior. While the president's agenda was not explicitly stated, the EPA let us know in early 2017 that funding for the conference had been cut and the event would thus be delayed. In early 2018 we were asked if we could still make time to present, given that travel stipends would not be provided. Kansas City, MO, is familiar territory for us, and not a far distance to travel. And so it was that we found ourselves one of the only non-EPA presentations at the conference, learning as much as we taught.

For one, did you know that the EPA employs people explicitly for the role of managing Community Involvement? That this skillset which we assumed would be central to the agency's mission, is actually performed by employees who are not directly involved in the science, research, and testing undertaken by the technical staff? 

Or, did you know that you can ask for free brownfield technical support from the EPA in your region? As an architect, Maria was particularly struck by the utility of having some of the sharpest expertise in this area available for free while considering the uncertainty of contaminated sites. 

So when it came time to present, Maria and Frank went back to the very basics: relationships are the basis of getting work done in community. Frank trained our participants in 1:1s, meeting in person with individual community members to understand and harness their motivations, as well as how personal development and technical development go hand in hand? Maria introduced our participants to Sherry Arnstein's [Ladder of Civilian Participation](http://www.participatorymethods.org/sites/participatorymethods.org/files/Arnstein%20ladder%201969.pdf), as a rubric for gauging how the community is truly involved in creating change. Then she taught the [People Organizing Place Toolkit](http://www.bcworkshop.org/posts/toolkit-labs) she developed as a fellow with [buildingcommunityWORKSHOP](http://www.bcworkshop.org/). The basic theory behind the Toolkit is that every interaction we have within our communities has potential and power, to identify, explore, and address our community's desire for improved health.

Frank and Maria's session was the last to finish, but, perhaps due to their engaging and novel subject matter, the room was slow to empty. Instead, EPA staff lingered to talk with their fellow participants with whom they had realized a strong community in a very short period of time. 